The aim of this systematic review was to point out the current state of precision beekeeping and to draw im­
plications for future studies. Precision beekeeping is defined as an apiary management strategy based on
monitoring individual bee colonies to minimize resource consumption and maximize bee productivity. This
subject that has met with a growing interest from researchers in recent years because of its environmental im­
plications. The Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analysis (PRISMA) was selected to
conduct this review. The literature search was carried out in the Scopus database for articles published between
2015 and 2023, being a very recent issue. After two rounds screening and examination, 201 studies were
considered to be analysed. They were classified based on the internal parameters of the hive, in turn divided by
weight, internal temperature, relative humidity, flight activity, sounds and vibrations, gases, and external pa­
rameters, in turn divided by wind speed, rainfall and ambient temperature. The study also considered possible
undesirable effects of the use of sensors on bees, economic aspects and applications of Geographic Information
System technologies in beekeeping. Based on the review and analysis, some conclusions and further directions
were put forward.

1. Introduction

microprocessor powered by a battery and usually linked to a network to
remotely send the data collected by the server. The microprocessor
collects data at regular intervals before transferring it to a server, the
two main types of microprocessors used today are Arduino and Rasp­
berry Pi [4]. The detected data is sent to the cloud for storage, analysis
and alarm generation [5]; in some already tested systems the informa­
tion is displayed by beekeepers on an application that groups data by
hive [6].
In recent years, monitoring systems have greatly advanced through
the use of wireless sensor networks (WSN). A WSN consists of embedded
devices that can acquire data from different sensors, process them and
communicate with a computer and a cloud database [7]. These devices
are known as nodes or motes and are the core of the Internet of Things
(IoT), defined as a network of Internet-enabled objects connected to web
services that interact with these objects [8].
Considering the growing interest of the researchers towards PB, the
aim of this paper is to examine and summarize the most recent published
articles in the field of PB, especially taking into consideration the
monitoring of hive internal and external parameters, in order to make

Precision Agriculture (PA) methods have been developed in different
fields of agriculture, such as animal husbandry, viticulture, horticulture
and forestry [1]. In addition, Precision Beekeeping (PB) has been
developed in recent years, firstly defined by Zacepins et al. [2] as an
apiary management strategy based on monitoring individual bee col­
onies to minimize resource consumption and maximize bee productiv­
ity. PB supports traditional beekeeping, which provides for the manual
and periodic control of the apiaries, often located at considerable dis­
tances from each other, this entailing a high cost to reach them. Each
hive is inspected on average 15 times a year and, meanwhile, the
beekeeper has no insight into the condition of the colonies, making
timely action impossible to take [3].
PB uses smart hives, equipped with sensors, aimed at detecting the
parameters descriptive of the colonies state of health and providing in­
formation to the beekeeper via web-based systems that are accessible
also by smartphone, in this way the beekeeper can choose to inspect only
the hives that require direct supervision. The sensors are connected to a
detailed and reliable forecasts on the evolution of the behaviour of the
bee colony, through the application of suitable methodologies and
instruments.

2.1. Identification
The research was conducted in January 2023. The Scopus database
was used taking into consideration title, abstract and keywords. It was
selected as being the most relevant for publications in the biosystems
engineering area. The following criteria were adopted: (1) years
(2015–2023), (2) subject areas (Agricultural and Biological Sciences;
Environmental Science; Computer Science; Veterinary Science and
Veterinary Medicine; Engineering; Chemical Engineering), (3) keywords
(precision beekeeping, precision apiculture, honey bee monitoring,
smart hive, connected hive) and (4) language (English). A total of 72
articles were identified and exported into an Excel spreadsheet for
further analyses.

2. Materials and methods
In this study, a systematic literature search method was applied,
using the identification, screening and eligibility procedures described
by the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and MetaAnalyses (PRISMA) statement (https://prisma-statement.org/accessed
on 2 January 2023) [9]. It describes new reporting guidelines, reflecting
advances in methods for identifying, selecting, evaluating, and sum­
marizing studies published in the literature.
2.2. Screening

2.3. Eligibility

In this phase, the 72 identified articles were examined by reading
their titles and abstracts. The inclusion criteria considered to perform
the screening were:

The authors examined all of the 65 selected articles by reading the
full texts. The criteria for inclusion in the next stage were:
• The full text of the article is available
• Article is about precision beekeeping
• Article is about smart hives
• Article about honey bee monitoring
• Article is not a book

• Article on precision beekeeping
• Article on smart hive
• Article on honey bee monitoring
All the 72 articles were reviewed at this stage, but only 65 of them
met of the inclusion criteria.

In this phase, a total of all 65 articles were processed, meeting the
above listed criteria. Fig. 1 shows the review methodology flow chart.
2.4. Additional review

relative humidity, 66 for mass in the sense of weight of the hive, 68 for
sound, 27 concerning flight activity, specifically entry and exit of the
hive (bee inflow/outflow). For the external parameters, that is wind and
rain, there were 12 and 14 items respectively. The distribution of the
selected papers based on the studied parameters is shown in Fig. 3.
During the examination of the articles, in order to link the abovementioned parameters to the behaviour of the bee colony, it was
considered appropriate to include also some papers concerning the
biology of insects, some of them published before the time period
examined with reference to PB (2015–2023).
The country of origin of the first author was also considered, with
reference to the geographical position of the publication. Most of the
publications come from Latvia with 28 articles, followed by USA with
26. Germany has 20 articles, Italy and United Kingdom 11 have publi­
cations each. China appears with 10 publications, followed by France,
Brazil, and Mexico with 8, 7 and 6 respectively. Canada and Spain have 5
publications, while 4 publications were found for Poland, Turkey,
Ethiopia, Bulgaria, New Zealand, followed by India, Africa, Slovenia
with 3 articles and finally Serbia, South Korea, Greece, Russia, Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Japan, Romania, Belgium, Australia, Denmark,
Hungary, Philippines, Vietnam, Sweden, Egypt, Arizona, Ireland,
Luxembourg with 1–2 papers (Fig. 4).
On average, 23 papers were published per year between 2015 and
2022. Fig. 5 shows a growing trend starting from 2017, a year with 17
published papers, to reach the maximum of 38 published articles in
2020, while in 2021 and 2022 there were respectively 23 and 16 papers.

To identify additional articles related to precision beekeeping which
may be missing from the keyword search, the 65 articles found in Scopus
were saved and listed. Then, the automated search options in Scopus
electronic database were used to obtain all articles that where either
cited or referenced by these 65 articles. In total, 520 articles were
identified and exported into an Excel spreadsheet to be analysed.
Applying the search criterion language (English) the field narrows down
to 516 articles.
The same screening method adopted in section 2.2 was then applied,
reducing the 516 articles to 200. The articles were read and only 172
met the criteria reported in section 2.3. However, it turned out that 36 of
the 172 articles had already been considered in the first 65. Therefore,
these articles were excluded and the remaining 136 were considered.
Overall, 201 articles were found and reviewed, i.e. the initial 65 and the
additional 136 resulting from the additional review. Fig. 2 shows the
flowchart of the methodology used for the additional review.
3. Results
Analyzing the selected papers, internal parameters of the hive are
taken into consideration (section 3.1), in turn divided by weight of the
hive (section 3.1.1.), internal temperature (section 3.1.2), relative hu­
midity (section 3.1.3), flight activity (section 3.1.4), sounds and vibra­
tions (section 3.1.5), gases (section 3.1.6), and external parameters
(section 3.2), in turn divided by wind speed (section 3.2.1), rainfall
(section 3.2.2) and ambient temperature (section 3.2.3). Furthermore,
this study considered possible undesirable effects of the use of sensors on
bees (section 3.3), economic aspects (section 3.4), and applications of
Geographic Information System (GIS) technologies in beekeeping (sec­
tion 3.5).
As regards internal temperature, 98 articles were identified, 69 for

3.1. Hive internal parameters
Regardless of their use (e.g. research, beekeeping, awareness raising
on various issues, such as environmental ones), the main objective of
smart hives is to provide real-time information on the state of health of
the colony and the quality of its internal environment. It is therefore
result was obtained in China, Tai’ an City, Shandong Province, an area
with 12.9 ◦ C annual average temperature, 26.4 ◦ C highest monthly
average temperature in July, and − 2.6 ◦ C lowest monthly average
temperature in January.
The scales used in most researches are placed externally at the base
of the hive and detect the total weight of the hive. In the low cost
platform by Seritan et al. [15], the mass sensor is composed of a single
load cell (Fig. 6 a), it has an accuracy of ±100 g and detects up to a
maximum of 200 kg, while the system proposed by Ochoa et al. [16] uses
four load cells placed at each corner of the base of the hive (Fig. 6 b). On
the other hand, the system proposed by Sakanovic & Kevric [17] detect
the weight of each individual frame of the hive using twenty sensors,
two for each frame. In the model proposed in Ref. [14] by Li et al. the
sensor for detecting mass is placed in an internal structure of the hive the
frames are placed on, in order to measure only the total weight of the
frames.
The weight monitoring system of the hives proposed by Zacepinz
et al. [18] uses a single point load cell, this monitoring can help identify
the beginning and end of the nectar flow and evaluate the foraging ac­
tivity of the colony.
When analysing the weight of the hive, some meteorological factors
such as precipitation and wind, can influence the data [10]. To over­
come the problem of moisture absorbed by the wood of the hive,
Zacepins et al. [19] recommend the use of polystyrene hives, alterna­
tively they recommend taking into consideration the mass variations of
an empty hive placed under the same environmental conditions.
important to control parameters inside the hive such as weight, tem­
perature and relative humidity, sounds and vibrations. These parame­
ters and the main technologies used to monitor them are described in the
following sections.
3.1.1. Weight of the hive
The weight of a hive provides important information on the size and
activity of the colony; its increase suggests a production of honey and an
expansion of the population, on the contrary, a decrease may indicate
the consumption of honey, typical of the winter season, but at other time
periods it may be related to swarming or mortality events (poisoning,
diseases, etc.) [10].
An abnormal variation in the weight of the hive may also indicate
theft [11]. During the day, there are variations in the weight of the hive
that can be considered normal: in the morning, when the bees go out to
forage, there is a drop of about 300–500 g, while with the return of the
bees laden with pollen and nectar, the weight gradually increases until
just before sunset. During the night, this parameter may undergo a
decrease due to the consumption of honey by bees [12], a reduction of
200 g per night was recorded by Catania & Vallone [13] for the entire
monitoring period. During the cold season the bees rarely go out to
forage, consuming the internal stocks of the hive, and consequently the
weight of the colony tends to decrease by 30–80 g per day [14]. This

3.1.2. Temperature
Internal hive temperature is the primary indicator of a colony’s
health. The ability of a colony to thermoregulate is influenced by the
subspecies and, within this, by the genetic diversity of the colony [10].
Bees maintain a temperature of 34 ± 1.5 ◦ C near the brood [16]. Tem­
perature variations can occur in correspondence with natural events,
such as swarming, or adverse events, such as a weakening of the colony,
which is unable to keep the temperature stable. Indeed, by measuring
temperature, swarming can be predicted, since temperature inside the
hive tends to increase in the immediately preceding period [12]. In the
model proposed by Andrijević et al. [5] a push notification is set up and
sent, informing about changes in the hive, especially when the internal
temperature exceeds 35 ◦ C. On the contrary, in the model proposed by
Ochoa et al. [16], when the temperature drops below the threshold of
20 ◦ C near the brood, an alarm sends a voice call, an e-mail and an SMS.
When monitoring the internal temperature of the hive it is important
to consider the position of the sensors; those placed close to the brood, in
the central and warmest part of the hive, are less affected by external
conditions, while in the periphery, closer to the walls of the hive, they
will be more affected [3]. Individual sensors can be inserted in a small
box placed longitudinally in the center of a normal frame [20] or sus­
pended in the center of the hive near the brood [21], or in the center of a
frame which is positioned between the body of the hive and the hon­
eycomb [22]. In the model proposed by Zabasta et al. [23] two more
sensors are added to the central one between the external frames, while

in Ref. [24] the authors use two Humidity Temperature Sensors
(DHT22) installed in the center of lateral side and in the center of the
back side, directly in the wood panels of the hive. Finally, in Ref. [14]
two sensors are arranged on the internal wall near the entrance to the
hive. Fig. 7 shows some examples of sensor installation.
On the other hand, in some studies the location of the sensors is not
indicated so the reported values are difficult to compare; for example, in
Ref. [25] the authors indicate a stable brood temperature between 28 ◦ C
and 32 ◦ C, lower than in other studies. The machine learning model
based on the long-term memory algorithm (LSTM) has also been used to
detect when a bee colony is about to lose control of its temperature [26].
The predictive model analyzes internal temperature and relative hu­
midity, external temperature, weight and sound.
3.1.3. Relative humidity
Relative Humidity (RH) inside the hive can be considered as an in­
dicator of health and optimal development of the bee colonies, which
the bees are able to maintain at stable values of around 70% [13].
For egg hatching, the optimal RH range goes from 90 to 95%, while
values lower than 50% hinder this phase [27]. RH can also influence the
development of parasites and pathogens; specifically, values between
55% and 70% favor the reproduction of varroa (Varroa destructor), while
higher values reduce its reproduction [28].
A good correlation between hive internal parameters and weather
conditions is important for production purposes; RH inside the hive
appears to respond to the external weather conditions. An increase in RH
(>95% RH) was detected on days with high levels of precipitation [29].
Similarly to temperature, RH is a useful parameter for predicting
swarming, as it has been observed that this event is preceded by a
decrease in RH due probably to ventilations, consisting in a rapid flitting
of bee wings [30]. In Ref. [24], the DHT22 sensor is also used for RH
measurement, having a 0–100% RH measurement range with 2% ac­
curacy and 0.1% resolution. The authors noticed that bees were able to
keep the internal RH quite stable during the year of observation.
at the hive entrance and use infrared (IR) radiation to detect bees
departing and arriving to the hive [3]. Whereas in Ref. [39], foraging
activity monitoring is based on the use of Wireless Sensor Networks
(WSN), with an average counting accuracy of 84.92% and 85.95% for in
and out, respectively.
The BeeCheck counting device validated in Ref. [33], distinguishes
incoming and outgoing bees, consists of 24 entrance tubes made of
polyethylene, with seven capacitive sensors installed in each tube; the
passage of the bees causes a change in electrical capacity which acts as a
signal. The authors proved capacitive sensors to be superior, since they
measure more precisely and were less susceptible to dirt and propoli­
sation from bees compared to optical sensors, such as infrared, where
frequent failure is reported as signals are jammed by contaminants.
However, bee counter devices have some drawbacks; when the flight
activity is high, counting errors may occur due to bees trying to enter the
hive at the same time [40].
The use of a camera does not interfere in any way with the normal
behavior of the bees and allows to collect other data: predation by
hornets, detection of parasites such as varroa [41] and loads of corbic­
ular pollen [42,43].

3.1.4. Flight activity
Bee flight activity is defined as the number of bees entering and/or
leaving the hive in a given time interval. In spring, more than 100,000
flights departing and arriving in a day can be recorded in a welldeveloped hive [31]. The number of bees leaving the hive to forage is
positively correlated to the increase in environmental temperature and
solar radiation and negatively to environmental relative humidity [32].
Flight activity provides information on colony populations and foraging
activity; it is also an important parameter to monitor when evaluating
the impact of pesticides on bees [33].
Flight activity has been negatively correlated to the presence of
predators, especially bee-eaters (Merops apiaster) [34] and hornet (Vespa
spp.).
Standard methods for estimating bee flight activity involves the use
of two observers both having a hand-held counting device and one
keeping time [35]. The use of human observation, while likely accurate,
limits the amount of time that the hive can be observed.
In recent years, automated counting methods have been adopted to
reduce human error and time [10]. Flight activity can be monitored
through images continuously acquired at the hive entrance. In Ref. [36]
the camera is attached to the front wall of the hive, about 30 cm above
the entrance, and pointing downwards; moreover, a white table is
positioned in front of the entrance to better distinguish the bees (Fig. 8).
In Ref. [32] the webcam is placed in front of the hive entrance inside an
observation box with a red LED lighting panel. In this study the bees are
detected using the background subtraction method, using the Kalman
filter to predict the future position of the bees and applying a suitable
algorithm to assign detection to existing targets which allows counting
with a precision of 94%. Object tracking algorithms were applied to
count the number of bees that enter and leave the hive based on a pre-set
boundary surrounding the hive entrance in Ref. [37]. They obtained an
over count of departures by 18% and arrivals by 44%. The Long
Short-Term Memory (LSTM) recurrent neural network model achieved
good results in bee activity prediction as found in Ref. [5]. The authors
obtained an error of 8.9 missed bees per hour for bees outbound and 7.8
missed bees per hour for bees inbound at the hive. However, the surveys
were made in autumn and the authors expected to find higher errors per
hour for measurements carried out during spring and summer.
As stated by Ref. [38], in the last decade, promising approaches have
been made by using enhanced video-based systems to record bee flight
activity utilising deep learning and artificial intelligence. Commercially
available bee in-and-out activity counting devices are usually installed

3.1.5. Sounds and vibrations
Bees communicate within the colony through vibrations and sound
signals [44]. Continuous sound monitoring can provide important in­
formation on bee health. It can be used to detect the presence of the
queen [20], predict swarming [45] or pillaging [46], colony strength
[47], the presence of parasites and predators [44].
Queen bees emit sounds of different frequencies: before flickering,
they produce a series of short pulses with a frequency of about 350 Hz; as
soon as they emerge, they emit sounds with a frequency of 400 Hz
during the first day and about 500 Hz from two to four days after birth.
They start with around 17 short pulses, and the number decreases to
around 7 after several days [48].
Before swarming, bees make a special sound that spreads at a dis­
tance of 5–6 m from the hive at a frequency of 1500 Hz [49]. When they
feel threatened by predators such as hornets (Vespa spp.) and bee-eaters
(M. apiaster) they emit a hissing sound with a frequency ranging from
300 to 3600 Hz [50].
The analysis and classification of the vibroacoustic signal involves
the acquisition of sound using microphones or accelerometers; the
recorded signal is usually filtered to remove background noise and un­
wanted frequencies. Finally, the data are classified for subsequent ana­
lyses [51]. Different types of microphones placed inside or outside the
hive can be used. Their position varies based on different scientific
approaches. Electret microphones are used in Ref. [25], clip micro­
phones in Ref. [52] and MEMS (Micro Electro-Mechanical Systems)
microphones in Ref. [24], in Ref. [53] accelerometers were used. In
Ref. [54] the position of the microphones was chosen to monitor
different parts of the colony, placing one near the hive entrance and the
other near the brood.
Vibrations and sounds data are extremely difficult to explain,
because the meaning of the sound or its variations can only be inter­
preted if associated with the simultaneous observation of what is
happening in the colony; moreover, the different sensitivity of the mi­
crophones makes it difficult to compare the data [47].
Papers related in hive sound analysis generally use data pre­
processing with systems that are able to recognize bee sounds and
discriminate them from other captured sounds. In Ref. [30], the authors
applied a Butterworth filter with cut-off frequencies 100 Hz and 2000 Hz
to remove all sound signals disturbing the bee frequencies. Kulyukin
et al. [52], compared several deep learning (DL) and standard machine
learning (ML) methods in classifying audio samples from microphones
deployed approximately 10 cm above Langstroth beehives’ landing
pads. Audio classification algorithms they designed were able to
discriminate bee buzzing, cricket chirping, and ambient noise.
Most of the bee-unrelated sounds are short-lived compared to
beehive sounds. In Ref. [55] the authors used a method based on a Fast
Fourier Transform (FFT) and Self-Organising Map (SOM) to investigate
how the sounds produced by honeybees in hives changed after their
queen had been removed. The model achieved high accuracy of 92%
discriminating between queen-absent and queen-present hives. In
Ref. [56] the author achieved the best performance in swarming pre­
diction with the system based on Hidden Markov Model (HMM) acoustic
models and Mel-Frequency Cepstral Coefficients (MFCC) features,
although Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) system provided high
accuracy when large amounts of acoustic training material are available,
but demanding higher computational power.

3.2. Hive external parameters

3.1.6. Gases
Few studies describe gas monitoring in beehives. Carbon dioxide
(CO2) measurement plays an important role in analyzing hive behavior.
It is related to bee metabolism, as a variation in its respiratory emission
is associated with the metabolic heating of a bee in its normal activity.
Furthermore, when CO2 inside the hive reaches levels higher than the
atmospheric value, the bees begin to ventilate to control and keep it at
an acceptable level, i.e. between 0.1% and 4.3% [57,58]. This parameter
is also related to the hive internal relative humidity and temperature and
the amount of sound generated by bees, which correlates with respira­
tion and gas exchange events [24]. In Ref. [29] the authors monitored
the presence of CO2 inside the hive; they also evaluated the presence of
polluting gases such as: nitrogen dioxide (NO2), ethanol (CH3CH2OH),
ammonia (NH3), carbon monoxide (CO) and methane (CH4). The au­
thors confirmed that low CO2 levels could indicate the loss of bees due to
disease, poisoning, attack by predatory animals or family queenless,
thus requiring immediate action by the beekeeper.
The presence of some gases can be used as an indicator of honey bee
disease. According to Ref. [59] valeric acid, caprylic acid and isocaprylic
acid may be indicator of the presence of Paenibacillus larvae, the
causative agent of American foulbrood (AFB). They developed a device
equipped with semiconductor gas sensors, with a sampling probe placed
in the middle of the beehive (Fig. 9). In Ref. [60] the authors identified
40 compounds as volatile biomarkers for AFB infections, particularly 2,
5-Dimethylpyrazine showed the greatest sensitivity and accuracy for
diagnosing AFB, it was exclusively detected in AFB-disease larvae and
was detectable in beehives with <10 AFB-symptomatic larvae. The au­
thors state that these biomarkers are prime candidates to be targeted by
a portable sensor device for rapid and non-invasive diagnosis of AFB in
beehives.

3.2.2. Rainfall
In [39] the authors state that bees are not active in rainy days when
the ambient relative humidity is higher than 80%.
Honey bees can predict future rainfall by increasing foraging activ­
ity. He et al. [65], with Radio Frequency Identification (RFID) moni­
toring, demonstrated that foragers work more intensely in the days
preceding rains than in those following a sunny day.
Subspecies of A. mellifera are found in a wide range of climates, from
hot and dry to tropical and temperate [27]. Hives are evidently affected
by the external weather conditions [61]. Ngo et al. [32] show the cor­
relation between environmental data and colony activity (in terms of
pollen collection). The results show that temperature, relative humidity,
wind speed, rainfall and light intensity influence pollen collection. For
example, heavy rains or a light breeze negatively affect the quantity of
collected pollen. Climate also indirectly influences pollinator activity by
altering the amount and sugar concentration of nectar in flowers [62].
The hive can only be inspected during the day with no rain and the
ambient temperature is in the range 15 ◦ C–38 ◦ C [63]. Monitoring cli­
matic conditions is therefore essential to keep bees healthy.
3.2.1. Wind speed
The flight of insects is energetically expensive, and this cost is also
influenced by the presence and intensity of wind; indeed, bees have a
lower foraging rate as wind speed increases. Furthermore, in case of long
windy periods, bees refrain from going out to forage and honey pro­
duction stops. In Ref. [64] the authors found that a wind speed of just
2.75 m/s results in a 37% decrease in flower visits.
Wind is measured and related to honey production in Ref. [13].
Decreases in honey production were observed at wind peaks of over 4
m/s. The reduction in honey was attributable to the lack of exit of the
bees and their consumption of honey. Therefore, the choice of the site
must provide for poor wind conditions, as it represents a strong envi­
ronmental factor limiting honey production.

3.2.3. Ambient temperature
Honey bees use all their strength to heat the hive; being hetero­
thermic insects, their body temperature is prone to significant changes.
However, bees possess an extraordinary power of thermoregulation, this
function of their body is able to stabilize the body’s heat according to the
environment and the different needs and this allows them to maintain
colonies throughout the year [66].
Foraging activity takes place in a wide range of temperatures, from
10 to 40 ◦ C [27]. Ambient temperature interferes with the life of the
colonies; when temperature is too high or too low compared to the
temperature of 35 ◦ C which guarantees regular breeding of the brood,
bees have to invest significant energy resources to cool or heat the hive,
respectively. In Ref. [67] costs of thermoregulation, however, were
rather independent of ambient temperature when in the range 13–30 ◦ C.
As the resources needed to fuel thermoregulation are strongly
limited, honey bee colonies should refrain from brood rearing under
cold environmental conditions. When ambient temperature is low, bees
go into cold stress, worker bees tend to remain relatively inactive and
cluster densely in the so-called winter cluster to reduce heat loss from
the colony, while individual workers actively produce heat by flight
muscle shivering to keep the cluster core temperature above ambient
temperature [68].

assigning each location on the map an estimated amount of resources to
be collected at that location (Fig. 10).
This model was then improved in Ref. [72] in terms of details by
proposing a system capable of identifying the ideal number of bee col­
onies necessary for optimal foraging. The new model considered mul­
tiple factors as the number of fields in the area, field productivity,
possible level of contamination, presence of infrastructures. For
example, the authors coded the fields by colour according to their
pesticide applications, ranging from bright red to bright green (Fig. 11).
The region with the value equal to zero (field without pesticides) have
its polygon coloured bright green.
The geographical characterization of an area can be considered a
useful tool for honey production. Using GIS, allowing the acquisition,
recording, analysis, display and return of information deriving from georeferenced geographical data, thematic maps can be created to describe
that area. In Ref. [75] the authors also used GIS to identify the best lo­
cations for new apiaries within a given area, thanks to a set of specific
data: availability of flowering plants, land slope, distance from water
resources and roads, the distance between apiaries, as well as climatic
factors such as temperature, relative humidity and rainfall.
Furthermore, GIS has been used to predict the sites invaded by
parasites and to trace the movements of invasive species within new
environments in order to allow for the identification of the most effec­
tive interventions against parasites [76].
In [77] an interactive map was designed, using Google Maps, as a
decision support tool in solving spatial problems associated with the
American Foulbrood disease. By selecting a position on the map, the
beekeeper has the possibility of identifying potential risks of infection
and consequently being able to decide on a new position for the hive
(Fig. 12).
GIS can be used alone or in combination with other technologies, as
well as Remote Sensing (RS), which acquires information from satellite
or aerial images of the site, then included into the GIS analysis to provide
more information on the study area [78].
Vegetation land cover variations can be studied using GIS and RS to
understand the impacts on honey production [79].
Maps from such systems are an effective aid to beekeepers in
selecting the most appropriate locations for their apiary. In Al-Baha

3.3. Possible undesirable effects of sensor use on bees
A major concern of the effects of Radio Frequency Electromagnetic
Radiation (RF-EMR) on animals is tissue heating due to the specific
absorption rate of the propagated wave. Short-term exposure to
Extremely Low Frequency-ElectroMagnetic Fields (ELF-EMF) at 50 Hz,
comparable to those found around power lines, reduced learning per­
formance and increased bee aggression in Ref. [69].
Wireless sensor networks used in precision farming systems need not
raise pollinator health concerns. A study carried out by Henry et al. [70]
indicate that 2.4 GHz signal strength levels over 72-h periods did not
affect temperature, humidity, and acoustic measurements compared to
hives that did not receive exposure to long term RF-EMR.
The use of sensor protection is suggested to prevent them from being
propolized, as in Ref. [22] where coating with mesh <0.2 mm is
recommended.
3.4. Economic aspects
Beekeepers are not usually willing to invest in digital solutions;
therefore, the cost of smart hives becomes a crucial aspect, and should be
reduced to the minimum possible [18].
In [15] the authors realized a low-cost platform to monitor the health
of bees and the quantity of honey produced, already described in section
3.1.1., the cost of which is approximately € 300. The data collection
system of weight, temperature and relative humidity can range from 17
to 35 USD per hive in Ref. [16]. The cost calculated for the prototype is €
192 in Ref. [18] and € 170 in Ref. [22] excluding the Global System for
Mobile Communications (GSM).
Although there are sufficient hardware and technical resources for
the practical application of precision beekeeping, the market uptake of
sensor-based decision support systems is still very low. The main reason
is the uncertainty about the economic benefit that using these systems
could provide [71]. To reduce costs, only a part of the hives per apiary
could therefore be equipped with sensors, assuming that different col­
onies in the same environment are in similar conditions [4].
3.5. Geographic Information System (GIS) applications in apiculture
Normally beekeepers choose to locate apiaries based on their expe­
rience and sometimes the location may not be optimal for bee colonies.
An apiary should normally consist of 30–80 colonies for practical pur­
poses, the most important question determining the optimal number is
the amount of forage available in a given area [72]. In some countries,
such as Indonesia [73], nomadism is very common, and beekeepers are
forced to change the location of the apiary very often to provide food
sources for their colonies.
In [74] the authors developed a model using the Python program­
ming language, with the help of aerial and satellite images of agricul­
tural fields detected using Google Maps with the aim of providing
support to beekeepers in the search and selection of suitable apiary lo­
cations. In the first step of the process, the fields in the aerial image of
the region were annotated with a polygons and an estimated value of
resources on that field was given, obtaining a semantically annotated
map. In the second step, the method calculated a value function
4. Discussion
Precision beekeeping was born in response to the need of optimizing
beekeeping management with sensors and specific programs, with the
aim of helping beekeepers understand what is happening inside the
hives without necessarily making inspections. Smart hives remotely
provide real-time information about the hives, thereby minimizing
management costs and at the same time minimizing stress in the colony
[71].
Weight monitoring provides one of the most important data for
beekeepers about the colonies, as it is related to significant activities
such as the start of nectar collection and the consumption of food re­
serves by the colonies which can indicate the need for additional power
supply. Continuous monitoring of the weight of at least one reference
colony at the apiary, can help to identify the beginning and end of
nectariferous flow and evaluate the foraging activity of the colony [18].
Monitoring the internal temperature of the hives gives indications on
the health state of the colonies, which in optimal conditions are able to
keep constant relative humidity and temperature. If the temperature
inside the hive is correlated to the ambient temperature and the day/
night temperature range, it means that the hive is unable to do ther­
moregulation and requires timely intervention.
Monitoring the external environmental parameters is also essential
to correctly understand the state of bee colonies [18].
Some researchers [47,82,83] integrated the data collected by the
sensors placed inside the hive with meteorological data and weekly in­
spections, obtaining a high precision model (Healthy Colony Checklist,
HCC). The standardized HCC inspection form indicates the size of the
brood, the quantity of adult bees, the presence of the queen, the abun­
dance of food, the absence of stress and adequate space. This is an
original approach that allows to better interpret the data collected by the
sensors and to train the forecasting algorithms [82].
Another source of information of great interest is represented by the
actions that beekeepers perform on the hives, such as feeding, harvest­
ing, applying treatments against diseases, and their effects on the colony
[71]. The latest precision beekeeping systems provide the same infor­
mation in digital format that beekeepers would have recorded during a
traditional visual inspection, allowing to reduce the number of seasonal
visits to the apiary.
In [3] the main commercial solutions for precision beekeeping are
analysed. The Israeli company Beewise created container-type hives
with 24 colonies inside, equipped with a system that can get every single
frame and take a picture of it. The Beehold system, on the other hand,
uses sensors placed inside each frame, capable of processing a digital
image and determining the content of each single cell.
There are few studies on the prediction of the future conditions of the
hives using statistical methods. In Ref. [25] the authors used a
Long-Term Memory Algorithm (LSTM) to anticipate temperature drops
in hives, while in Ref. [71] the authors use the time-varying Vector
region of Saudi Arabia, Adgaba et al. [80] mapped the spatio-temporal
distribution of bee forage using GIS. Specifically, the data was stored
and processed using the Trimble GPS supported with ArcGIS10 software
program. Subsequently, the data was used to estimate frequency, den­
sity, abundance and diversity of the species present and above all their
apicultural value. Furthermore, Remotely Sensed Satellite Image was
obtained and processed using the Hopfield Artificial Neural Network
technique. The results clearly showed the distribution of flowering
plants and their area in the study site, helping to estimate area coverage
of the different species, the honey production potential and the expected
flowering period. Migratory beekeepers can be helped in evaluating the
available resources in different times and places.
In [81] a model to map monthly nectar and pollen production via
land cover maps was developed to better manage floral resources for
bees. It can contribute to management decisions such as the location of
the hives depending on floral resources and where nectar limited areas
may be found. It can also contribute to planning areas for bee protection.
Autoregressive Models (tvVAR) to make 1-, 3-, and 7-day forecasts of
internal hive variables (temperature, relative humidity, and mass). In
Ref. [5] a prediction model capable of estimating the volume of bee
outflows and inflows per hour, which simulates the dependence between
environmental conditions and bee activity was developed.
5. Conclusions
The numerous papers published in the period 2015–2023 taken into
consideration in this study demonstrate that the future of beekeeping is
digital; it is therefore necessary to implement the various monitoring
systems for the remote and optimized management of bee colonies.
These systems may help to accurately predict the hives’ internal vari­
ables, thus reducing the beekeeper’s response time to events related
with the internal conditions with positive economic consequences.
The health status of the hives can be monitored through the use of
sensors to detect temperature, relative humidity, sounds, images,
weight, etc. Each parameter alone can provide useful indication, how­
ever, several parameters simultaneously detected allow to have a com­
plete view of what is happening in the hive, as evidenced by the studies
in which complex forecasting models are built.
Finally, some recommendations for future studies emerge from this
literature review.
Marchal et al. [84] underlined that new sensors are needed to study
the multifactorial impact of environmental stressors on bee colony
health, such as a predator counter. Indeed, predators such as hornets
(Vespa spp.) have a significant impact on honeybee populations in
Europe and eastern Asia, but there is a lack of quantitative data on the
relationship between predation and parameters characterizing colonies.
Correlating hornet predation pressure with bee colony health metrics
may provide important answers for developing control strategies for
such aggressors.
Remote sensing and the application of sensors will have to be used in
synergy for better territorial planning of the beekeeping monitoring and
surveillance activity, useful for defining the traceability of honey pro­
duction and protecting its quality.
The use of precision beekeeping will make it possible to counteract
the negative impact of climate change on the life of bees. Furthermore,
the introduction of artificial intelligence with specific algorithms will
make it possible to reduce the use of pesticides which represents one of
the threats to the survival of the bee colonies.


