The technical execution, adequacy of earlier and current solutions and development
perspectives are analysed to prioritise different challenges for PB. The development of

Keywords:

decision support systems, which is usually a stumbling block in Precision Agriculture, is

Precision Beekeeping

suggested to be a mid-term task. In the long term, specific DSS-controlled electronic de-

Precision Apiculture

vices should be developed to enable new functionalities for PB. Specific classes of actors are

Decision support

proposed to operate within future PB systems for the automatic execution of suggestions

Honey bee

made by decision support systems, as well as for diagnostic purposes.
PB systems should be optimised by searching for appropriate combinations of different

Sensors
Monitoring

sensors, and corresponding decision support systems must provide convenient, reliable
and cost efficient solutions. The development and specification of PB systems should
consider business interests, distance to the apiary, expected risks and other peculiarities.

1.

Introduction

Precision Agriculture (PA) methods have been developed and
adapted for a number of agriculture-related sub-branches
such as Precision Farming, Precision Livestock Farming, Precision Viticulture, Precision Horticulture, and Precision

Forestry (Zacepins, Stalidzans, & Meitalovs, 2012; Zacepins &
Stalidzans, 2013).
Recently, Precision Beekeeping (PB) or Precision Apiculture
has been defined as an apiary management strategy based on
the monitoring of individual bee colonies to minimise
resource consumption and maximise the productivity of bees
(Zacepins et al., 2012). The PB approach aims to reduce the

stress and unnecessary activities of bee colonies as well as the
waste of resources. This is achieved through the timely and
adequate reaction of beekeepers at the individual colony level
in cases of necessity. The aim of the proposed solution is not
to replace but rather to support the beekeeper, who will always remain the crucial factor in the good management of
honey bees.
How could the adaptation of PA methods help in
beekeeping? There are different tasks for PB at the bee colony
and apiary scales both in passive and active periods of honey
bee colony development (Ambrose, 1992; Schmickl &
Crailsheim, 2004; Stalidzans & Berzonis, 2013). It would be
an industrial advantage to remotely detect at colony level:
 developmental states of bee colonies (Stalidzans &
Berzonis, 2013);
 events that may require the beekeeper's action, including
swarming/pre-swarming state, extreme nectar flow,
queenless state, broodless state, dead colony, starving, and
first cleaning flight in spring;
 diseases, including colony collapse disorder (CCD) (CoxFoster et al., 2007; Van Engelsdorp, Hayes, Underwood, &
Pettis, 2008).
While the first and second groups of diagnostics tasks are
mostly interesting for a particular beekeeper, the early diagnostics of disease, particularly infectious disease, can prevent the losses of bee colonies across wider areas. It would be
very important to be able to detect and follow the dynamics of
CCD (Cox-Foster et al., 2007; Van Engelsdorp et al., 2008) and
diseases such as varroosis. Insights into the dynamics of disease spread and other problems, such as those that may be
associated with global warming, could be achieved if the daily
activities of many colonies are recorded and stored over
several years (Mezquida & Martinez, 2009). Early disease diagnostics would also reduce the contamination of bee products with different residues of active substances used for
disease treatment.
PB is an emerging research direction that is supported by
scientists from different countries. The ICT-AGRI (ICT-AGRI
Secretariat, 2013) ERA-net consortium in the European Union
has supported a project called “ITApic: Application of information
technologies in Precision Apiculture” during 2013e2016 (ITAPIC
Latvia, 2013). Another project entitled “The Swarmonitor”
aims to develop a diagnostic tool for honey bee colonies by
monitoring vibrations in the hive (Swarmonitor, 2014). These
types of projects will facilitate the implementation of PB in the
future, but there are still many challenges for the successful
implementation of PB into beekeeping practices.
The aim of this paper is to analyse the current status,
challenges and development perspectives of Precision
Beekeeping. Similarly to the three phase cycle of Precision
Agriculture (Terry, 2006, p. 224), Precision Beekeeping can also
be split and analysed in three phases: data collection (Section
2 of this article), data analysis (Section 3) and application
(Section 4) (Zacepins et al., 2012). During the data collection
phase, measurements from bee colonies and the environment
are collected. The data analysis phase draws conclusions
regarding bee colony behaviour and activity trends based on
measurement data, predefined models and expert knowledge.
In the application phase, decisions are made and actions undertaken based on data analysis for improving apiary
performance.

2.
Data collection phase in Precision
Beekeeping
The main objective of the data collection phase of PB is the
development of real time and online tools for the continuous
monitoring of apiaries. These tools operate at least partly at
the individual colony level and use solutions based on automatic or automated information technology (Zacepins et al.,
2012). Various technologies can be applied to monitoring the
bee colony (Meikle & Holst, 2014), but only the most informative measurements are feasible for the PB approach. In this
section, the available measurement approaches are described
linked to their motivation and possible applications in
detecting bee colony states. The peculiarities of data analysis
are addressed in section three.
The data collection process in PB can be classified into
three groups (Human et al., 2013; Zacepins & Stalidzans, 2013):
1) apiary-level parameters (meteorological parameters and
video observation);
2) colony-level parameters (temperature, humidity, gas content, sound, video, vibration of hive and weight);
3) individual bee-related parameters (the number of
incoming/outgoing bees, the number of bees in the hive
entrance area).
The colony-level parameters consist of the contribution of
all or most of the colony-forming individuals (temperature,
weight), while in the case of parameters based on individual
bees (number of incoming/outgoing bees), the information
about the colony is derived from the behaviour of a small
number (for instance, 1% or less) of colony-forming members.
Apiary-level monitoring
Currently applied measurements: Apiary level observations can
be carried out using meteorological parameters and video
monitoring. Measurements of apiary-located meteorological
parameters, such as wind, precipitation and light, may
explain some peculiarities in colony behaviour. These parameters can be measured from a meteorological station or,
less accurately, by video observation in which the movement
of leaves and branches indicate wind and raindrops indicate
rain. Video systems can record video when a motion or sound
detector is activated to observe humans, cars, animals or
other disturbing factors for the apiary (Meitalovs, Histjajevs, &
Stalidzans, 2009). This type of information can increase the
detailed understanding of colony-level measurements. For
instance, the increased number of incoming and outgoing
bees may be caused by external noise or the appearance of
humans, which can be registered by the video cameras used
for observing the apiary. An increase in the hive weight may
be caused by rain that can be detected by video or a meteorological station.
Technical execution: Apiary-level monitoring is not complicated due to the availability of many standard solutions used
in agriculture and other sectors.
Adequacy of current solutions: Video systems create huge
amounts of raw data, and so video recordings can be activated
only when they are needed or by user request. Meteorological
information can also be collected from existing weather stations, as weather conditions usually are similar in larger areas
and the measurements needed are not specific for beekeeping.
Future development perspectives:
 appropriate activation of data-intensive video observation
to limit data transmission costs and electricity demand;
 collaboration in the use of metrological stations;
 application of rotating camera and zooming option to
observe all colonies in the apiary.
Colony-level monitoring
Currently, the most popular methods of colony level monitoring are temperature, humidity, weight, sound, vibration
and video monitoring (Meikle & Holst, 2014).
Temperature monitoring of the colony
Currently applied measurements: Continuous automatic temperature measurements have been described in many experiments (Chuda-Mickiewicz & Prabucki, 1996; Eskov & Toboev,
2011; Fahrenholz, Lamprecht, & Schricker, 1989; Meitalovs
et al., 2009; Stalidzans & Berzonis, 2013; Van Nerum &
Buelens, 1997; Vornicu & Olah, 2004).
The low cost of data collection, processing and data
transfer from temperature measurement systems facilitates
many applications of temperature measurements in
beekeeping (Zacepins & Karasha, 2013). Based on temperature
information, beekeepers and researchers have tried to detect
colony states such as increased food consumption, the start of
brood rearing, pre-swarming states, and death of the bee
colony. Brood volume and winter cluster volume can also be
identified by monitoring colony temperature. To determine
brood volume, many sensors (one or even two per frame)
should be placed into the hive (Linton, 2012). For example, the
E-ruche project (Voskarides, Josserand, Martin, Novales, &
Micheletto, 2013) uses this type of multi-point temperature
measurement in the hive. Another approach is to use a single
sensor, placing it above the upper hive body in the middle of
horizontal cross section (Stalidzans & Berzonis, 2013),
increasing convenience and reducing costs. In this case data
analysis and decision support become more challenging. In
any case, direct influence of ambient temperature on the
measurements has to be assessed.
Technical execution: Different technologies for measuring
temperature are well established. Temperature sensors are
usually robust and can easily survive even in the bee nest
environment. Finally, the cost of temperature monitoring is
relatively low.
Adequacy of current solutions: many solutions are available
on the market. Beekeepers should individually choose the
appropriate solution depending on financial aspects and
infrastructure available in the apiary location.

Future development perspectives: Temperature monitoring
seems to be developing towards wireless technologies and
alternative energy sources such as solar energy. These systems should be simple to use and maintain, and remote access to data should also be granted.
Weight monitoring of the colony
Currently applied measurements: the weight of an inhabited hive
(i.e., the sum of the weight of the box, combs with food stores
and the bees) can be measured to monitor the different states
of the colonies or to identify several events:
 the occurrence of nectar flow during the foraging season
(start and end of nectar flow) or daily gain in nectar stores
(Human et al., 2013; Linton, 2012; Meikle, Rector, Mercadier,
& Holst, 2008; Okada, Akamatsu, & Iwata, 2012);
 consumption of food during non-foraging periods (Seeley &
Visscher, 1985);
 the occurrence of swarming events through a decrease in
the hive weight (Linton, 2012; Meikle et al., 2008);
 estimation of the number of foragers (Linton, 2012).
Technical execution: There are two ways of measuring the
weight of the colony: first, automatic measurements can be
made using industrial scales, which allows for the continuous
measurement of the bee colony weight; and second, simpler
scales can be used to take measurements manually. Continuously operating scales are more expensive than noncontinuous scales at the same measurement accuracy.
Weather influence should be taken into account because
wooden boxes absorb moisture and thereby bias weight
measurements (Meikle et al., 2008). The use of Styrofoam
boxes is recommended for more accurate weighing. In the
case of wooden hives, it is recommended that the changes in
weight of an empty hive (with frames and honey but no bees)
are taken into account to clarify the mass changes due to
environmental effects such as humidity and wind.
Adequacy of current solutions: A number of dedicated
weighing systems for beekeeping (Human et al., 2013),
including Beewise (BeeWise, 2013), BeeWatch (BeeWatch
Team, 2013) and CAPAZ (CAPAZ team, 2013), indicate the
applicability of this approach. These systems can be used in
remote monitoring of hives by communicating weight values
using SMS technology accessible from any mobile phone. Due
to their relatively high price, the continuous scales used in
these systems are not of much interest to beekeepers. In
addition, the mass resolution for measurements made using
Beewise and CAPAZ is only 100 g, which is not sufficient for
monitoring colonies during the passive state (winter period)
when nectar is not harvested and the daily changes in mass do
not exceed 100 g.
Several interesting initiatives have been set up to determine the nectar flow and share the information with other
beekeepers who use Web systems, demonstrating the interest
in the exchange of information among beekeepers:
 http://biavl.volatus.de/bsm0/BSM.html# e this Web system monitors colonies from different Nordic countries,
including Denmark, Sweden, Norway, Latvia and Germany
(Honningmeteret, 2012);
 http://www.vdrb.ch/service/waagvlker.html e this open
website enables all users to see colony mass changes in
Switzerland;
 http://honeybeenet.gsfc.nasa.gov e the NASA Goddard
Space Flight Centre has initiated a project in which the
daily weighing of hives by volunteer beekeepers are
merged with satellite data (Nightingale, Esaias, Wolfe,
Nickeson, & Ma, 2008).
Future development perspectives: The high costs and low accuracy of continuously loaded electronic scales limit their
application. Moreover, the manual weighing of colonies is too
laborious to perform at the industrial scale.
As the dynamics of weight changes is most important, less
precise indirect weight determination methods like vibration
 n, & Gil-Ribes,
response analysis (Castro-Garcı́a, Blanco-Rolda
2011; Oveisi, Minaei, Rafiee, Eyvani, & Borghei, 2012) or other
methods could be developed.
Sound monitoring of the colony
Currently applied measurements: Audio signals and audioprocessing techniques can be applied to estimate bee behaviour (Dietlein, 1985; Eskov & Toboev, 2010; Ferrari, Silva,
Guarino, & Berckmans, 2008; Mezquida & Martinez, 2009).
Ferrari proposed an acoustic method for predicting the
swarming period, based on the labelling of sounds. Swarming
is indicated by an increase in the power spectral density at
approximately 110 Hz. When the bees are beginning to swarm,
the sound is augmented in amplitude and frequency to 300 Hz
and, occasionally, a rapid change occurs from 150 Hz to 500 Hz
(Ferrari et al., 2008).
Mezquida and Martinez (2009) presented a platform for
beehive sound monitoring. The goal of the platform is to make
it possible to store information about the swarm's activity by
building a global net of monitored hives covering apiaries with
different climates, races and managements.
Eskov and Toboev (2010) proposed a method of analysis of
non-stationary acoustic processes. The method is based on
recurrent integration, which allows the basic trends in the
time structure of the noise to be analysed. The method was
evaluated during the investigation of the relations between
the changes in the physiological states of bee colonies and the
amplitudeetimeefrequency structure of acoustic noise that
they generated.
The analysis of the sound of flying bees near the beehive
entrance to assess the productivity of the beehive has also
been proposed (Brundage, 2012).
Several commercial devices for sound monitoring have
been proposed. As early as 1959, the sound analyser “Apidictor” (Woods, 1959) was presented. In addition to swarming
detection, it is claimed that the “Apidictor” could be used to
detect the acceptance of a new queen, queen failure (drone
breeding) and the health of colonies during the winter.
Other examples of patented devices include the honey bee
acoustic recording and analysis system for monitoring hive
health (Bromenshenk, Henderson, Seccomb, Rice, & Etter,
2007) and the acoustic sensor for beehive monitoring
(Brundage, 2012). Methods and devices for identifying
different species of honeybees have been described (Howard,
Buchanan, & Kenneth, 1989).
Technical execution: Sound measurement itself is not a
complicated task but the location of the sensor and the influence of non-bee noises from the environment should be
analysed. It is also important to determine the correct frequency at which bee colony sound monitoring can be performed. The processing of measured sound is a serious
computational task.
Adequacy of current solutions: Many devices and methods
have been developed for sound analysis but they are not
widely applied in industrial beekeeping. So far, the solutions
seem to work only in the hands of researchers. The reason for
this may be the large stochastic component in the buzz of a
colony and the complexity of sound interpretation.
Future development perspectives: Generally sound seems to
be a promising research direction in the analysis of insects
and similar organisms (Mankin, 2011; Mankin, Hagstrum,
Smith, Roda, & Kairo, 2011). More research on sound analysis in beekeeping-related issues seems to be necessary as the
currently proposed methods are not applied in practice
despite the reports of their successes since 1959.
Other colony level monitoring methods
In addition to monitoring temperature, weight, sound and
video, it is also possible to monitor the humidity, vibrations
and gas contents of the hive.
Automatic air humidity measurement systems for colony
activity monitoring (Human, Nicolson, & Dietemann, 2006;
Meitalovs et al., 2009; Vornicu & Olah, 2004) are usually extensions of temperature measurement systems. Compared to
the temperature sensors, humidity sensors are more expensive and have to be kept clean and protected from bees
because the water vapour cannot overcome wax or propolis to
reach the sensing element. Any effect of these materials on
temperature measurements is likely to just be a lag effect.
Bencsik showed that a set of statistically-independent
instantaneous vibration signals of honeybees can be identified and monitored by means of a simple transducer secured
to the outside wall of a hive, allowing swarming prediction
several days in advance. The output of this monitoring
method could be used to provide other signatures that are
highly specific to other physiological processes in honeybees
(Bencsik, Baxter, Lucian, Romieu, & Millet, 2011). The “Swarmonitor” (Swarmonitor, 2014) project aims to develop a tool
for the diagnostic monitoring of honey bee colonies by
monitoring vibrations in the hive.
Oxygen and carbon dioxide content in the bee nest have
been measured in some experiments (Southwick, Roubik, &
Williams, 1990; Van Nerum & Buelens, 1997) because both
gases are involved in metabolism. Nonetheless, automatic gas
measurements are too expensive to compete with temperature measurements. Gas content measuring devices need
controlled air flow, which may influence the microclimate of
the bee nest.
Individual bee-related parameters
Individual bee monitoring approaches aim to use video systems or bee counters to observe the individual bees around
the hive entrance (Campbell, Mummert, & Sukthankar, 2008;
Liu, Leonard, & Feddes, 1990).
Video monitoring of the colony
Currently applied measurements: Bee colonies can be monitored
using direct video observations. With video, it is possible to
monitor the hive entrance for the flight and other activities of
a honey bee colony, which is an important indicator of the
strength and condition of the hive. Video monitoring of the
colony can be used to count incoming and outgoing bees
(Campbell et al., 2008), which can help in the discovery of
unusually active or inactive colonies and swarms or the
inference of the presence of CCD and diseases like nosema,
chalkbrood, stonebrood, or European foulbrood. Video observation of the landing area can be used to detect signs of
robbing, swarming and bearding (Linton, 2012).
Liu also developed a computer-based system for studying
honeybee behaviour (Liu et al., 1990). The main function of
this system is to count the number of bees moving in and out
of a hive and to determine their direction of movement. To
correlate bee activity with environmental factors, the system
also monitors the temperature inside and outside the hive as
well as solar radiation, humidity, wind speed, and the weight
of the hive. The system also shows the potential for studying
bee movement inside hives during an overwintering period, as
the infrared sensor assembly can be installed inside a hive as
well as at the hive entrance.
Technical execution: Video monitoring of the colony is not
complicated due to the availability of solutions used in other
sectors. Though bee recognition algorithms are well developed, they require significant computational power.
Adequacy of current solutions: Existing solutions are targeted
to observe one hive with a video system. It is not economically
feasible to equip all hives with video cameras due to the huge
amount of data generated. However, even the observation of
one hive can shed light on the apiary state.
Future development perspectives: The use of rotating cameras
and zooming options can be used to observe all individual
colonies in the apiary with a single device. The development
of the video system should include an analysis option so the
beekeeper can be sent only the analysed data rather than the
raw data or pictures.
Bee counters

Currently applied measurements: Bee counting can be done not
only with video systems but also with specific mechanical and
electronic devices called bee counters. The number of bees
leaving and returning to the hives is the main measurement.
These devices should be placed in the hive entrance to obtain a
daily read-out of colony foraging activity. Bee counters can be
used to monitor colony activity, peak flight times, presence of
pesticides, the impact of weather on flight activity, swarms,
percent return rates, the impact of chemical release, and other
changes in flight. Photoelectrical counting of outgoing and
incoming honey bees was already proposed in 1969 (Spangler,
1969). So far the most popular device used in research applications is the infrared detector-based BeeSCAN (Struye, Mortier,
Arnold, Miniggio, & Borneck, 1994), which is produced by Lowland Electronics bvba in Belgium (Lowland electronics, 2013).
Technical execution: The bee counter is usually a
microprocessor-controlled device located in front of the hive
entrance and monitors all bee activity going in and out of the

hive. Mechanical or electronic counters consist of several
tunnels or openings that each have sensors to determine
whether the bees are coming or going.
Adequacy of current solutions: All mechanical and electronic
bee counters have a number of single bee sized passage
channels in contrast to video based systems. Independent on
their number, they are altering at least the air movement,
removal of dead bees from the hive and probably some other
bee activities. At the same time, devices are well tested and
deliver reliable results.
Future development perspectives: The devices without moving
parts have better propects because of lack of maintenance
issues. At the same time the use of channels is a drawback
because it changes the hive entrance area and requires the
cleaning of channels. Easy data processing of bee counters
makes possible easy integration in larger control systems
(Bromenshenk, Seccomb, Rice, & Etter, 2004).
Future development of data collection systems

A number of PB-related parameters can be measured or
observed. For the implementation of measurements, various
technologies and methods can be applied, including data logging and development of wired or wireless sensor networks.
The costs of sensors and the robustness and convenience
of their use seem to be critical for their future applications in
industrial and hobby beekeeping. For instance, temperature
sensors are robust and are not disturbed much by wax,
propolis or honey in the hive. By contrast, humidity, gas,
sound and some other sensors need to be cleaned or even
replaced when they become contaminated.
It is also important to develop standardised ways of
installing particular sensors or their placement during
installation (Meikle & Holst, 2014).
Data transfer can strongly influence the convenience and
operational costs of the system. Therefore, an important
question is the proportion of gained knowledge compared to
the costs of hardware and software used in measurement
collection, data processing costs and communication costs.
Wired sensor networks are relatively cheap but can be
impractical in use. Wireless data collection from remote locations is more convenient and has become economically
feasible in the last decade. The application of wireless sensor
networks may also facilitate the development of PB (Dı́az,
 rez, Mateos, Marinescu, & Guerra, 2011; Elsts, Balass,
Pe
Judvaitis, & Selavo, 2012; Elsts, Balass, Judvaitis, Zviedris,
et al., 2012; Mezquida & Martinez, 2009; Morais et al., 2008).
The energetic demand of different solutions may play an
important role if a centralised electrical supply is not available. Solar or wind power would be a good support for travelling beekeeping methods in which remote data collection
has even higher value (Alippi & Galperti, 2008; Gaudette,
Hanumaiah, Vrudhula, & Krunz, 2012).
Data analysis phase in Precision
Beekeeping
Currently, researchers and individuals view monitored data
and correlate it with the colony status (state) by inspecting the
hive. Only after the meaning of the data becomes wellunderstood can automated analysis and recognition algorithms be developed for data interpretation, which can then
be used to inform the beekeeper of the colony state (Linton,
2012). Recognition rules have to be tested for statistical significance in connection with the resolution and accuracy of
the measurements. This section concentrates on the analysis
of the bee colony measurements described in section two.
The data analysis phase is generally the stumbling block in
the adoption of Precision Agriculture (McBratney, Whelan,
Ancev, & Bouma, 2005). In beekeeping, there have been
several attempts to analyse the data to detect the states of preswarming (Bencsik et al., 2011; Ferrari et al., 2008; Meitalovs
et al., 2009) and broodlessness (Stalidzans & Berzonis, 2013),
the start of brood rearing during the winter (Zacepins,
Meitalovs, Komasilovs, & Stalidzans, 2011) and the developmental period of a colony (Stalidzans & Berzonis, 2013).
While developing data analysis software, it is important to
clarify where analysis should take place. It is possible to
analyse data at the hive, in the apiary, on the beekeeper's
computer or on the internet. When wireless systems are used,
power consumption can be greatly reduced if the data are
analysed close to the sensor because less data must be sent
along the communications channel. The use of solar batteries
and fairly powerful microprocessor data analysis in the apiary
is becoming a realistic scenario (Linton, 2012).
Important states of the bee colony to be detected

The most valuable desired result of data analysis in the PB
approach is the detection of critical colony states. The
cheapest and most reliable combinations of measurements
and data analysis methods have the greatest potential for use.

Annual state

Temperature measurements above the upper body of the hive
have been suggested for automatic determination of the five
development periods of the annual cycle of bee colonies: (1)
winter brood rearing, (2) spring brood rearing, (3) summer
brood rearing, (4) autumn brood rearing and (5) autumn
broodless period (Stalidzans & Berzonis, 2013). This knowledge can help in synchronising the beekeeper's activities with
the developmental stage of individual bee colonies in apiaries.
A system for temperature-based estimation of indoor and
outdoor brood rearing during the winter has been reported
(Zacepins et al., 2011).

Intensive nectar flow

Electronic scales give a good assessment of the intensity of
nectar flow and indicates when it is necessary to provide the
colonies with additional supers (Human et al., 2013). This
becomes very important if the bee colonies are located over a
large area and frequent visits are costly. Another important
situation is the sudden start of intensive flow as in the case of
honeydew flow (Human et al., 2013).

Death of colony

The integrity of the beehive and either the absence or death of
the bee colony in the hive can be easily detected directly or
indirectly by all the parameters discussed in the data

collection section. The disappearance or death of the bee
colony can be registered if the average temperature in the hive
is equal or very close to the ambient temperature (Zacepins,
2012), average air humidity and gas concentrations are equal
to the ambient ones, weight remains constant, no bees enter
or leave the colony, and no sound or vibration of a living colony can be detected. Disturbance by direct solar heating has to
be avoided or kept in mind, especially for temperature and
humidity measurement interpretation. Early detection and
registration of the death of an individual colony can be valuable information for beekeepers, enabling fast reaction to
prevent further losses if necessary. The simultaneous death of
several colonies may be a result of extreme weather conditions, demolition, CCD or diseases, such as varroosis.
Swarming

The automatic remote detection of swarming-related activities would have a large impact on beekeeping. The detection
of the pre-swarming state of a colony is a popular tool for
avoiding the loss of bees (Esch, 1967; Woods, 1959) when part
of the bee colony leaves the hive, dramatically reducing the
productive potential of the colony. The earliest electronic
swarming detection system based on sound analysis was
“Apidictor,” which was “in regular use” by Woods (1959),
indicating the age of the automatic swarming detection idea.
Now, after 50 years, this and similar solutions do not seem to
exist on the market. Analysis of sound has been developed
further but practical applications are still missing (Eskov &
Toboev, 2010). Further research has proposed the combined
measurements of sound, temperature and humidity (Ferrari
et al., 2008) for the detection of the pre-swarming condition.
Intensive data analysis is also required in this case. A system
with video, temperature and humidity measurements was
developed to clarify the best placement for temperature and
humidity sensors used in detecting the pre-swarming state
(Meitalovs et al., 2009). Unfortunately, all these attempts lack
extensive experiments and statistics about the reliability of
these systems, and further research is needed. Swarming can
also be identified by the weight of a colony because prime
swarms average about 16 000 worker bees (Winston, 1992).

Broodless state

The automatic detection of broodless state of a colony can
help the beekeeper to “repair” the colony by adding a queen,
brood or uniting different colonies. Temperature measurements seem to be promising, as broods in the nest force the
bees to maintain a stable high temperature (about þ35  C) and
compensate for the changes in ambient temperature whereas
the temperature in broodless colonies is much more dependent on the ambient temperature (Stalidzans & Berzonis,
2013). Nonetheless, further experiments are needed.

Queenless state

The detection of a queenless state, characterised by a dronelaying queen and laying workers, would also be an important signal for the beekeeper as the broodless state is more
easily detected from three weeks after the loss of queen.
Those three weeks hardly reduce the potential of colony, but
so far we have not found any promising research in this
direction.

Other states

Starving can cause the death of a colony both in winter and
summer. Starving risk can be assessed by weighing (Human
et al., 2013). Bees could be easily saved by the addition of
food by the beekeeper. Moreover, the first cleaning flight
during spring in cold climates is important because increased
brood rearing can be expected.
Because traditional inspection by visual observation of bee
colonies ignores many measurable parameters, new important bee colony states could be discovered after more
continuous measurements of bee colonies become available.
Decision support systems in PB

One of the sub-systems of Precision Beekeeping is the Decision Support System (DSS), which can be used to automatically analyse and interpret various measurements of the
colonies and the apiary. A similar term to DSS is expert systems (ES), which are software systems trying to replicate decision making of experts in a particular field.
There are several beekeeping-related DSS and ES
mentioned in the literature but they are mainly devoted to
apiary level management without analysis of individual bee
colonies and without real-time measurements. BEE AWARE
(McClure, Tomasko, & Collison, 1993) is an ES for diagnosis
and management of honey bee diseases, pests, parasites and
predators that needs on-site inspection and analysis of bee
colonies. Another ES for pest diagnosis has been developed in
Greece (Mahaman et al., 2002). These systems could be used as

tools for colony treatment after remotely detecting abnormalities in particular colonies or apiaries by PB methods. A
DSS has been developed for minimisation of movement distances of apiaries between locations of melliferous crops and
tree species (Vlad, Ion, Cojocaru, Ion, & Lorent, 2012) and for
analysis of beekeeping sustainability in particular regions
(Camargo et al., 2014; Estoque & Murayama, 2011). These ES
and DSS may be valuable in practical beekeeping but in this
review we concentrate on the PB approach that includes realtime data collection from individual bee colonies and data
analysis based decision suggestions by corresponding DSS.
Therefore PB is a different approach from the abovementioned beekeeping-related ES and DSS.
Generally different algorithms and rules can be used in PB
for computational support of the data analysis. Different bee
colony states have different levels of importance and can be
recognised with different levels of reliability. Therefore,
depending on the importance of the detected state, the reliability of state detection and the importance of immediate
action, DSS may be used to make some decisions automatically or to request the analysis of a proposed decision by a
specialist in data processing or a beekeeper.
DSS can process and combine different information such
as video, weight, temperature and sound measurements of
the colony. We propose dividing the PB DSS rules (decisions)
into two main groups: individual rules and differential rules
(Fig. 1). Individual rules (decisions) are based on single colony
monitoring and only the measurements and data for one
specific colony are accounted for. Differential rules (decisions)
are based on comparison of colonies within one apiary or even
comparing different apiaries in different locations.
We found in the literature some individual colony-based
PB decision support algorithms or rules expressed in a computer readable and executable form:
 preswarming: computer readable clustering analysis algorithm based on temperature measurements (Kridi,
Carvalho, & Gomes, 2014);
 preswarming: principal components analysis-based
detection by vibration measurements (Bencsik et al., 2011);
 preswarming: frequency content shifts from about the
range of 100e300 Hz to a higher frequency range of
500 Hze600 Hz and frequency content shifts from about
the range of 100e300 Hz to a higher frequency range of
500 Hze600 Hz detected by sound and temperature measurements (Ferrari et al., 2008);
 intensive brood rearing: summer temperatures above the
bee nest of at least 30  C during day and night indicates an
intensive brood rearing state of the colony, detected by
temperature measurements (Stalidzans & Berzonis, 2013).
The small number of published DSS rules does not prove
that the PB is not mature. In our opinion some valuable
computer readable PB rules are too obvious to be published in
scientific literature. We propose some examples of obvious
DSS rules below.
Individual rules:
 Death of colony: no buzz sound/vibration from the colony
by sound measurements,
 Death of colony: no moving bees at hive entrance during
the active summer period for one day detected by video
observation or bee counting (Struye et al., 1994),
 Intensive brood rearing: changes of ambient temperature
for more than ±10  C do not cause temperature changes
above the bee nest more than ±2  C.
Differential rules:
 low nectar flow: all measured colonies at the same location
have no increase in weight between two nights, detected
by scales,

 unspecified problems at individual colony: no increase in
weight between two nights just in one colony when other
colonies at the same location have weight increase detected by scales,
 hive damage (demolition, theft, storm, …): fast and
simultaneous convergence of temperature above the bee
nest to the ambient one in some colonies detected by
temperature measurements.

3.3.
Future development of data analysis and decision
support systems
Data analysis and DSS for use in PB are in an early stage of
development. There have been some discoveries about the
possible relations between captured data and events in colonies, but the results have not been widely tested in different
subspecies of Apis mellifera L. or varying climatic circumstances, hive types or other factors. One interesting direction
is the combination of different measurements in the analysis
process. The application of data mining software to data
measurement could give unexpected and counterintuitive
results. In addition, the involvement of mathematical models
seems to be a prospective basis for DSS.
Besides DSS rules, the resolution and accuracy of measurements should be defined to avoid cases when suggestions
from a good DSS algorithm fail because of low resolution and
accuracy of measuring system.
Effective DSS could also have a “pulling” effect on PB
implementation, because reliable and easily operable DSS
products should not be very expensive as they are software
that are not specific for each apiary. Thus, the accessibility
and efficiency of DSS may facilitate the purchase of data
collection equipment and the implementation of PB.
New methods for detecting the states of bee colonies can
be developed through the interdisciplinary collaboration of
bee specialists and engineers, physicists, mathematicians and
information technology specialists to develop counterintuitive approaches. For instance, the weight dynamics of the hive
could be detected by vibration and sound analysis that are less
accurate but much cheaper than scales.
Theoretically, each activity of the bees (including flight,
defence, cleaning, and brood rearing) requires specific energy
that is transferred into heat (resulting in temperature, humidity and gas content changes), sound (which can be
detected by sound and vibration sensors) and other measurable activities. Thus, we expect many opportunities for the
future development of new and affordable detection methods
through interdisciplinary collaboration as well as modern
measurement and data processing technologies (Table 1). It is
assumed that a state can be identified if the state-specific
deviation from the normal state can be registered by a
particular measurement.
In looking at the wide range of opportunities for combining
data collection and data analysis tools, priorities must be set.
It is possible to estimate the economic effect and return on
investment of different devices in the first iteration assuming
100% accuracy of predictions. Even with so optimistic an
assumption, recognition of many states may not be economically feasible because of low benefit/cost ratio. That can be
estimated by accounting for the benefit of state recognition for
a particular bee colony, the expected frequency of particular
states, the probability of correct remote recognition and the
costs of PB system implementation (Zacepins, Stalidzans, &
Karasha, 2013). It is possible that the recognition of some
states will have no economic effect on the apiary and will
probably never be widely used due to the financial aspects
even if technical solutions are available. Some indications of
different possibilities of state recognition by temperature,
sound and video measurements and the importance of the
state are suggested in Table 2.
Application phase in Precision Beekeeping

The third phase is application, and in the case of beekeeping
this cannot be significantly automated because beekeeping is
mostly performed manually. The literature reports only a few
automated solutions that can be applied in practice.
Automated indoor bee wintering (McCutchenon, 1984;
Zacepins & Stalidzans, 2012) gives the opportunity to control
the microclimate, which influences the behaviour of indoor
wintered bees. The temperature can be changed remotely and
can be increased if brood rearing must be stimulated or
decreased to inhibit brood rearing (Stalidzans, Markovics,
Krauze, Bilinskis, & Berzonis, 2007; Zacepins & Stalidzans,

2012; Zacepins, Meitalovs, & Stalidzans, 2010). In addition to
temperature, humidity and gas content can also be automatically controlled in bee wintering buildings to influence
wintered colonies. Generally, the main advantages of indoor
wintering in controlled microclimates are the possibilities of
determining the winter conditions and ensuring that colonies
are in predictable states in the early spring.
An automatic, remotely controlled system for cooling or
warming individual beehives depending on internal temperature and humidity measurements has been developed
(Altun, 2012). Another automatic device, which seeks to prevent the swarming of the bee colony, automatically rotates
the broodframe within the beehive by 180 every 24 h (Konya,
2007). Other automatic systems used in the implementation of
decisions, such as feeders, have been mentioned in the literature (Bromenshenk, Seccomb, Rice, & Etter, 2004).
The future perspectives for automatic application of DSS
suggestions seem to be limited in the near future because 1)
only a small fraction of beekeeping operations can be automated, and 2) DSS is still in an early phase of development.
Therefore, new PB-specific devices should be developed to
facilitate the automatic implementation of DSS suggestions.
One possible application could be an electronic device that
is activated when the pre-swarming state is detected by DSS.
The device would produce sufficient disturbances in vibration,
sound or other parameters in an individual hive to prevent
swarming until the beekeeper has been able to inspect the
hive. The disturbance of the bees would cause losses of energetic and physiological resources but these should be well
below the damage incurred by losing a swarm. Another DSS or
beekeeper-controlled device could be an apiary or hive level
alarm system against thieves or animals. Because hive opening or movement is easily detectable, an alarm system could
make bee colonies more aggressive in protecting themselves
against intruders especially if the intruders can be observed by
an apiary level video.
Another direction could be the development of diagnostic
devices that would check the hypotheses developed by DSS.
For instance, knocking-type vibrations at the hive could be
imitated to test whether the response of colony is characteristic of a particular state of the colony. Such a diagnosis
could support or contradict the initial hypothesis made by
the DSS.
Conclusions
The currently available PB systems are not widely used,
possibly due to a combination of several reasons: 1) the
benefit/investment ratio is unclear; 2) the use is complicated;
3) sensors and electronics require additional operational
costs; and 4) there may be differences in beekeeping practices
due to the subspecies of A. mellifera, climate and other
peculiarities.
Currently, the most developed and advanced phase of PB is
data collection. Nonetheless, this phase will remain underdeveloped until the automated data analysis and decision
support systems (DSS) can take advantage of available information to suggest operations to be applied by the beekeeper or
by automatic systems built in the hive.
From a mid-term perspective, DSS needs to be developed
as a part of data analysis. Good DSS software could be a strong
stimulus for PB implementation and, in developing DSS, it is
critical to 1) develop beekeeper-friendly data analysis
methods through DSS and its interface and 2) perform experiments under different genetic and geographical conditions to determine the adequacy of DSS conclusions and
suggestions because many currently proposed data analysis
and DSS solutions work only in the developer's lab. Data about
the reliability of DSS would enable increasingly accurate estimations of the return on investment to decide whether to
implement PB in practice.
An important direction of investigation that covers both
data collection and data analysis phases is the search for
appropriate combinations of different sensors and corresponding DSS to yield informative and cost-effective solutions. For instance, cheap sensors for temperature and sound
could be placed in each hive while more expensive sensors for
weight or video capture could be placed just in selected hives.
In addition, one video device could be used to monitor the
whole apiary. In calculating the specification of PB systems,
factors including business interests, distance to the apiary,
expected risks and other peculiarities should be taken into
account. Research priorities must also be set that account for
the potential return on investment in different devices and,
from the beekeeper's perspective, the benefits of state recognition for a particular bee colony, the expected frequency of
particular states, the probability of correct remote recognition
and the costs of PB system implementation.
In the long-term, new automatic devices or actors should
be developed to operate in combination with DSS. One direction would be the execution of suggestions made by the DSS,
such as the recommendation to delay swarming or stimulate
defensive behaviour. Another future direction is the development of diagnostic devices to test hypotheses made by DSS,
such as giving a vibration or sound impulse to analyse bee
colony dynamics and reactions in cases of suspected
swarming states.
More generally, the prospective implementation of the PB
approach is determined by 1) convenience of PB technology
implementation by a normal beekeeper and 2) the clear economic benefits by which, critically, the calculations of return
on investment can be reliable. The second point requires
scientific efforts to increase the reliability of data analysis and
suggestions made by DSS. A low probability of correct conclusions and predictions made by DSS is the highest risk factor
to successful PB implementation.
